Dear Stefan,

Thanks again for sending me your paper which I read with a lot of
pleasure.

I do have a few things to say about it:

- The parallel you draw to the Carnapian continuum is not quite
  correct: his is really not about inference rules. In fact Carnap's
  logics are best understood as relying on conditionalisation; see my
  paper in the Handbook for the Philosophy of Statistics. You might
  argue that Carnap is also worried about epistemic entrenchments, in
  which case you'd have to say more about the parallel than you do
  now.

- Igor Douven and I should perhaps have been less emphatic about the
  intuitions that drive people's answers to the Judy puzzle. We are
  not exactly wedded to the idea that P(Blue) is invariant. Our point
  is rather that, whatever your intuitions on that, those intuitions
  can be slotted into Jeffrey's rule. In other words, our arguments do
  not really hinge on MaxEnt bringing out the wrong intuition in Judy.

- As I guess you realise, showing that the result of MaxEnt is backed
  by another method does not yet show that MaxEnt is our best
  candidate for a universal inference rule. (I would, for example, not
  claim that it is "arguably outperforming all others".)

- I had not seen the powerset approach before and I think it has its
  own appeal. But of course there are issues with representing or
  portraying MaxEnt as, or at least paralleling it with
  conditionalisation, mostly to do with non-conglomerability. I also
  urge you to look at Halpern and Grunwald's paper on CAR.

- Quite apart from that, as you will be aware, the powerset approach
  hinges on assuming a particular probability over the sets C that
  realise the constraint. You should spend much more time motivating
  this assumption, because it drives your result on E[X]. (There is
  some irony in the fact that, to defend MaxEnt, you rely on a method
  that seems to presuppose a uniform probability over the C's.)

I hope these comments are of help to you and I wish you the best of
luck with the paper!

Kind regards,

Jan-Willem
