I want to address each point the referees have made and indicate how I have addressed it.

REVIEWER I

(1) Making the argument more clear.

I have given the paper a more detailed structure and introduced subsections. I have completely rewritten the introduction to clarify and focus the argument.

(2) Sections and their headlines should better guide the reader.

I have restructured this paper, especially the beginning sections, and introduced subsections.

(3) Adding a conclusions section is a must.

A conclusion has been added.

(4) Clarifying the originality of content.

I have clearly flagged subsections whose results depend on other authors; the characterization theorem for proper scoring rules is due to McCarthy as well as Henderson and Buehler; the symmetry and locality proofs are due to Savage, although I have expanded and clarified Savage's proof. Continuity, regularity, and the Levinstein argument are due to Levinstein. The remaining arguments and proofs are mine.

(5) Assessing the badness of failing.

I have introduced various references to Richard Pettigrew's book ``Accuracy and the Laws of Credence'' where symmetry is defended and mounted a sustained argument against this position.

(6) Adding a table with the different desiderata.

The table has been added with annotations.

(7) Minor comments by first referee.

(A) There are no longer sections with only one subsection.

(B) The remark on page 3 has been deleted.

(C) ``(0.5P+0.5Q)--this does not require a Euclidean metric.''

That is correct. I have added a clarifying note that Joyce uses the geometry of reason in as much as he requires (0.5P+0.5Q) to be epistemically symmetric with respect to its parents P and Q, which is according to the symmetry argument by Savage equivalent to an endorsement of the geometry of reason.

(D) I have provided a definition of a simplex near the beginning of the paper.

(E) ``L&P-updating should be introduced before it is applied.''

I have rewritten the introductory sections to take care of this point.

(F) ``I don't like the word "expectation". It makes people think about expected val- ues. How about "desiderata", "properties" or something else?''

This was a difficult point to address. While I understand the referee's concern, I was not able to come up with a substitute that didn't sound stilted, like the word ``desiderata.'' I played with expressions such as ``desired features'' and ``desired properties,'' but in the end I chose to stick with ``expectations.''

(G) ``Are these lists meant to consist of intuitive statements or are the items natural language formulations of formal properties?''

I consider them to be expressions of epistemic intuitions that in some instances can be formalized. Continuity, on the one hand, can be formalized painlessly; the formal representation of horizon, on the other hand, is an obvious artefact of the more comprehensive epistemic intuition. I have given expression to the artificial nature of this formalization in the revision.

(H) ``CONTINUITY and INVARIANCE: these properties need clarification.''

I have included the mathematical definition as well as a more precise natural language formulation in the revision.

(I) I have abandoned the terminology ``amujus.''

(J) ``Page 11: Delete the sentence following (3).''

Done. This was an error in the original paper. Thank you for pointing it out.

(K) ``Page 12: Where can I find the "brief sketch"?''

I have clarified the terminology to refer to the immediately following mathematical analysis of the Holmes example.

(L) ``Page 14: "minimally inaccurate"--if one measures in their sense.''

Quite right. I have reformulated this passage.

(M) ``Page 17: "meant to be"--by whom?''

I have added a reference to clarify that I am talking about Richard Jeffrey.

(N) ``"It is called standard conditioning."--Delete this sentence.''

Sentence has been deleted.

(O) ``Pages 28--30: A clearer structure of the argument would be nice here. The use of the "proof"-environment or other such structures is advisable.''

This is excellent advice. I have restructured the whole paper, but also in particular this passage, using the proof environment in LaTeX.

(P) ``COLLINEAR HORIZON: This has strong Euclidean appeal. I wonder whether a "logarithmic" equivalent of co-linearity can be found.''

I have added the following paragraph to the revision:

The way I have formalized the horizon and collinear horizon requirement is artificial in the face of the more comprehensive epistemic intuition. Collinear horizon especially is dependent on the Euclidean idea of collinearity. In a more integrated account it would be desirable to have these requirements reformulated in a more general fashion; convexity may play a major role in such a reformulation. It could, perhaps, identify a divergence that does not violate horizon or reveal why the divergence of information theory violates it. (I thank an anonymous referee for bringing this point to my attention.)

(Q) ``Page 33: "the information required is infinite."--outright impossible.''

Yes. I am hoping that is the impact this statement makes on the reader.

(R) ``Page 34: "escapes any epistemic intuition"--if so, is this soo bad?''

I think it is bad enough in the sense of awakening intellectual curiosity---why does information theory act in these unexpected ways? I suspect there are answers to these questions (I am actively working on finding them), and they could aid to find a more effective approach to formal partial belief representation in general (such as the use of differential geometry).

(S) ``Make indexing consistent. Either always or never. I prefer to always display the index.''

I would also prefer to display the index consistently, but in this case I don't know where the index isn't displayed. Please clarify, and I will correct.

REVIEWER II

(1) Discuss proposed responses on behalf of the advocate of LP-conditioning.

This is one of the major issues I have addressed in the revision. I admit that I was not aware of Richard Pettigrew's 2016 book Accuracy and the Laws of Credence when I originally wrote the paper. Pettigrew's book is an excellent monograph on the topics covered in my paper. It takes a strong position on symmetry and therefore provides a perfect foil to highlight the contrasts in my paper (while also providing a summary of much of the technical detail that is also in my paper). I have completely rewritten the beginning pages of the paper to address and respond to Pettigrew's account.

(2) Expand on Leitgeb and Pettigrew's global/local inaccuracy account as well as Benjamin Levinstein's ghost story.

For reasons of paper length, I have chosen not to follow this recommendation. Instead, I have made sure that there are clearly marked references to guide the reader to the literature. Leitgeb, Pettigrew, and Levinstein's accounts are complete and well-executed, so I did not feel a need to reiterate their arguments in an appendix.

(3) Reorganize the introduction.

I have paid careful attention to this recommendation, as it was also voiced by the other referee. I have completely restructured the introduction, hoping that the road map for the paper has gained in clarity and substance without adding too much in length. I have split off a Features of Scoring Rules section in order to make the Introduction section shorter.

(4) Geometry of reason terminology.

I have amended the paper to make clear that the term geometry of reason is Leitgeb and Pettigrew's.

(5) ``Leitgeb and Pettigrew muse about alternative geometries ...''

I have cut this remark. It is obvious that Leitgeb and Pettigrew are well aware of alternative geometries.

(6) Prejudice for simplicity and starting with Euclidean geometry.

These comments are well-placed. I have addressed them in two ways: (a) I have emphasized Thomas Mormann's assessment of dependence on Euclidean geometry in logic generally. (b) In this revision, I have more carefully identified Pettigrew's argument for simplicity/symmetry. According to Pettigrew, there is a lack of intuition whether the distance is from the ideal credence function to the partial belief or from the partial belief to the credence function. It is more symmetry than simplicity that makes Pettigrew take the next step towards endorsing symmetry. Yet then, with these kinds of arguments, there is always ``Symmetry and Its Discontents'' (S.L. Zabell).
