From sediomyle@gmail.com Thu Jun 15 05:56:33 2017
From: "Thierry Denoeux (International Journal of Approximate Reasoning)"
 <EviseSupport@elsevier.com>
To: sediomyle@gmail.com
Subject: Your manuscript, IJA_2017_81, has not been accepted
Date: Thu, 15 Jun 2017 02:47:18 +0000
MIME-Version: 1.0
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 8bit
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=utf-8
Status: RO
X-Status: F

   Ref: IJA_2017_81
   Title: Augustin's Concessions: A Problem for Indeterminate Credal
   States
   Journal: International Journal of Approximate Reasoning

   Dear Dr. Lukits,

   Thank you for submitting your manuscript to International Journal of
   Approximate Reasoning. I regret to inform you that reviewers have
   advised against publishing your manuscript, and we must therefore
   reject it.

   Please refer to the comments listed at the end of this letter for
   details of why I reached this decision.

   We appreciate your submitting your manuscript to this journal and for
   giving us the opportunity to consider your work.

   Kind regards,

   Professor Thierry Denoeux
   Editor-in-Chief
   International Journal of Approximate Reasoning

   Comments from the editors and reviewers:

   -Reviewer 1

   This paper argues that the attractiveness of the "imprecise credence"
   view trades on an ambiguity between two views:

   a naive view and a sophisticated view.

   The naive view is attractive but untenable, the sophisticated view is
   tenable but unattractive.

   While the paper has some merits, I can't recommend it for publication
   in IJAR for two reasons:

   first, the paper needs some restructuring and some rethinking of some
   arguments,

   second, I don't think IJAR is the right venue for such a non-technical
   philosophical paper.

   Even if the editors want to overrule me on point two, the paper should
   be rejected on the grounds of point one alone.

   There is no one central argumentative flaw I want to point to in this
   paper,

   I just think it is so rife with confusions, unacknowledged rebuttals

   and structural deficiencies that fixing all the problems would turn it
   into a completely different paper.

   Given all the small flaws with the argument, it isn't clear that @ can
   argue for @'s conclusion in anything like the way @

   currently does.

   The author (henceforth @) does not explain why @ uses the labels
   "Boolean" and "Laplacean".

   It isn't clear that historical views of Boole and Laplace really
   reflect the difference in opinion

   @ wants to highlight.

   On p.2 @ contradicts @self.

   @ says first that "the agent entertains a credal state C(X)" where

   C is a function from propositions to an algebra of subsets of the
   reals.

   A couple of sentences later @ claims that credal states are sets of
   probability functions,

   not set-valued functions.

   So the function C is not a function that picks out a state, merely one
   that reflects

   some aspect of that state.

   @ then makes a distinction between the credal state and the doxastic
   state that is never sufficiently explained.

   p.3 "From the perspective of information theory, it appears that an
   agent with sharp credences pretends to be in possession of information
   that she does not have"

   Being in possession of information is not a concept that has any role
   to play in information theory.

   What does @ mean by this?

   The INTERN argument is something of a non-starter,

   because the precise probabilist could respond that her credences in the
   fair coin are resilient

   while those of the unknown coin are not.

   That is, the difference between them shows up in how she responds to
   evidence of tosses of those coins...

   p.6 Why are the generalised Shannon measures unsatisfactory?

   p.7 "reasons that incline Booleans to permit instates"

   What @ means is "reasons to be a Boolean": Booleans, by definition, are
   those that permit instates.

   p.8 introduces but doesn't explain the distinction between Bool-A and
   Bool-B.

   The difference is allegedly illustrated by the example 3.

   But we are never clearly told what it is that Bool-B thinks about the
   example.

   I think @ needs to think harder about the structure of the paper,
   because it is something of a mess.

   p.10 the credal state/doxastic state distinction rears its head again
   here, again without adequate definition.

   "Any updating will merely change the partial beliefs, but no full
   beliefs"

   Well, if you update on E, you acquire a full belief in E.

   So what @ says is strictly false.

   What exactly does @ mean here?

   That the agent's full beliefs (or lack thereof) about chances don't
   change?

   Depends on what you learn...

   p.13 The formalism is inconsistent in its use of C and c.

   The explanation of dilation is unclear.

   How does (7) explain why (6) is true?

   Presumably because P(H_v) is unconstrained and ranges over all of
   [0,1].

   Someone unfamiliar with the phenomenon of dilation would not be able to
   glean much from this "explanation" of it.

   p.14 RETENTION is false in the precise case unless P(H_v)=0.5.

   Imagine you thought H_v was very likely,

   then being told that the coins match *is* evidence that H_iv is true.

   I don't feel the pull of REPETITION either.

   My reaction was "Well, let's build an explicit model of repeated coin

   tosses and *see* whether an imprecise agent learns".

   My intution is that if the precise agent in this model can learn, then
   so can

   the imprecise agent (or rather, the imprecise agent will fail to learn
   because of OBTUSE,

   rather than anything to do with dilation).

   The 2014 Bradley and Steele paper @ cites discusses and ultimately
   dismisses the REFLECTION argument.

   Aron Vallinder has a nice forthcoming paper on the topic of OBTUSE.

   http://www.vallinder.se/imprecise_inert.pdf

   p.18 C' and C'' are not defined.

   "the same instate can encode doxastic states which are relevantly
   different when it comes to updating probabilities"

   I don't know what this means.

   If an instate is a set of probability functions, then the sets of
   conditional probabilities are fixed.

   There's no way the same set of probabilities can "encode" different
   ways to update on the same evidence.

   As I said earlier (9) is simply false in the precise case.

   Its status in the imprecise case has been discussed by the Stanford
   Encyclopedia of Philosophy, by Bradley and Steele,

   by Pedersen and Wheeler...

   Pedersen, Arthur Paul, and Gregory Wheeler. "Demystifying dilation."
   Erkenntnis 79.6 (2014): 1305-1342.

   p.19 to say that the imprecise view "licences" the very long odds bet
   is a little misleading.

   On a permissive view of what imprecise decision allows the long odds
   bet is permissible but not mandatory.

   Indeed, taking either side of the bet is permissible.

   I think @ is pointing towards a weird feature of imprecise decision,
   but I think @

   overstates @'s case.

   p.22 the riposte seems to suggest that representation involves positing
   a relationship of identity between

   the represented and the thing representing.

   That is absolutely insane.

   Who in their right mind would hold that view of representation!?

   @ argues that the precise framework has a better fit with information
   theory,

   and since this theory provides powerful tools to justify the
   fundamentals of bayesianism,

   that's the better view of credence.

   First, I don't think the first clause of this claim has been
   established.

   @ earlier gestured at the fact that generalized Shannon measures were
   unsatisfactory,

   but didn't say why.

   But even if this were true, information theory is not the only way

   to justify fundamental tenets of Bayesianism.

   The "coherent betting" approach of de Finetti has proved to have a
   fruitful

   extension to imprecise credence.

   See, for example, the first couple of chapters of the Augustin et al
   "Introduction to Imprecise Probabilities".

   p.23 @ describes "updating, inference and decision making" as a "double
   task". I count three tasks there.

   p.25 @ now seems to be arguing that having precise credences doesn't
   determine precise betting quotients.

   But isn't determining betting quotients one of the core tasks that
   credences were supposed to perform?

   Given a credence of 0.53, what kinds of bets are such that,
   determinately, the agent ought to accept them?

   Is there a gap between her buying price and selling price?

   Aren't we now shading back into an imprecise view?

   p.26 "she must reject one of them not to incur a sure loss".

   Not with the bets as described: they always produce a net gain of 0.

   p.29--30

   "it appears to me that they outperform the Boolean approach"

   It isn't clear what measure of success @ has in mind here.

   -Reviewer 2

   IJA_2017_81

   Augustin’s Concession: A Problem for Indeterminate Credal States

   The paper engages with fairly recent philosophical literature on
   imprecise probabilities and responses to dilation to argue against
   representing cognitive commitments (beliefs) in terms of an imprecise
   probability model.  The paper is unpublishable, however, for two
   reasons.  First, the author is engaging a very narrow and
   largely-out-of-date philosophical literature that ignores relevant
   developments and prior work that covers the same ground.  Second, the
   very limited highly idiosyncratic view of IP undercuts the author’s
   ambitions to offer a sweeping rejection of IP models of single-agent
   cognitive commitments.

   The author is right about terminological confusion in this area, but
   the mess is due almost entirely to the small corner of the IP
   literature in philosophy that the author is responding to.  Walley is
   very clear that imprecision refers to the weakening of the additivity
   condition; Levi distinguishes between indeterminate and imprecision as
   distinct grounds for assessments that are not precise — which overloads
   the term ‘imprecise’, but is forgivable given the time periods (late
   80s and early 70s, respectively) these authors were writing.  The
   introduction of ‘imprecise credences’ and ‘mushy credences’ is very
   recent (late 90s, Weatherson, as far I gather; and mid 2000s, White and
   or Scott Sturgeon at a FEW in Wisconsin, respectively) and was launched
   into the literature without much consideration of the existing
   literature, much of it in SIPTA, that covered this ground, and covered
   it far more thoroughly and carefully.

   So, the author’s introduction of even more jargon is unhelpful, if not
   unkind, to the reader. Bool-A? Bool-B? instates? H_iv and H_v?  And
   waiting until section 3 to tell us what the difference is between
   Bool-A and Bool-B?

   A second point is that the authors construction of an imprecise
   probability model in terms of a closed convex set of probability mass
   functions — that is, a credal set — is about 10 to 15 years out of
   date.  This matters particularly since the arguments that author is
   attempting to mount will not go through, as they stand, if one starts
   instead with sets of desirable gambles.  See the first two chapters of
   Augstin et al.’s Introduction to Imprecise Probabilities (2014) for an
   introduction to the desirable gambles approach, and why it is favored
   by theorists in particular.

   Even within the credal set approach, the author equivocates between
   representing belief by a set of functions, upper and lower previsions,
   and the values of a lower prevision and upper prevision wrt some event.

   And speaking of events, the author’s Jeffrey-style approach to
   formalizing a lower probability model is an idiosyncratic choice given
   the sweepingly negative conclusion he/she wishes to establish.

   The discussion of dilation is similarly skewed by the literature the
   author considers. White’s argument against IP in 2010 is invalid.  This
   point was observed by Joyce and also by Pedersen and Wheeler, who also
   give a complete characterization of dilation in terms of distance from
   independence, which was an open question from Seidenfeld and
   Wasserman’s analysis.

   For learning, particularly involving Bernoulli generators, the author
   may wish to look to the literature on stochastic processes and
   imprecise probability models, as well as updating with regular
   extensions. Flip Hermans and Damjan Skulj’s chapter in Augustin’s et
   al.’s introduction is a good overview of stochastic processes, and
   Walley’s discussion of regular extensions and the basics of updating
   ought to be covered.

   In closing, a general remark, Seamus Bradley’s admonishment of
   philosophers in his SEP article ought to be taken to heart. Bradley
   complains about philosophers citing Walley without having read him, and
   that criticism applies to this manuscript.  Much has happened since
   Walley 1991; but the philosophical literature is filling up with work
   that hasn’t even absorbed this level of understanding of IP.  This
   won’t pass for IJAR; and it is a problem for philosophy that it can
   pass elsewhere.

   Have questions or need assistance?
   For further assistance, please visit our Customer Support site. Here
   you can search for solutions on a range of topics, find answers to
   frequently asked questions, and learn more about EVISE® via interactive
   tutorials. You can also talk 24/5 to our customer support team by phone
   and 24/7 by live chat and email.

   -------------------------------------------------------------

   Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. | Privacy Policy

   Elsevier B.V., Radarweg 29, 1043 NX Amsterdam, The Netherlands, Reg.
   No. 33156677.

