From em.phil.0.4d6649.7d511045@editorialmanager.com Wed Aug 24 02:26:55 2016
From: "Philosophical Studies (PHIL)" <em@editorialmanager.com>
To: Stefan Lukits <sediomyle@gmail.com>
Date: 23 Aug 2016 22:27:34 -0400
Subject: Your Submission PHIL-D-16-00054
MIME-Version: 1.0
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 8bit
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=utf-8
Status: RO

Dear Professor Lukits,

With regret, I must inform you that the Editors have decided that your manuscript PHIL-D-16-00054 "Augustin's Concessions: A Problem for Indeterminate Credal States",
cannot be accepted for publication in Philosophical Studies.

I would like to thank you very much for forwarding your manuscript to us for consideration and wish you every success in finding an alternative place of publication.
With kind regards,
Springer Journals Editorial Office
Philosophical Studies

The Editorial Manager is at: http://phil.edmgr.com/.

Please Note : Given the volume of submissions to Philosophical Studies, it is not always possible to send comments to authors.


COMMENTS TO THE AUTHOR:

Reviewer #2: 
This is a well written paper on an interesting topic.  Some
interesting points are raised, but it is, on the whole, a confused
piece, and not ready for publication.  In outline, the argument of the
paper is that advocates of imprecise or indeterminate credences are
guilty of an equivocation: there are two imprecise views, one of which
is intuitively compelling but flawed, and one of which is not flawed,
but not intuitively compelling.  I'm sympathetic with the author's
(henceforth @'s) position that the intuitive view is flawed (though @
does not do a good job of demonstrating this) but I do not find the
arguments against the sophisticated view at all convincing.  I should
add that I reviewed this paper before for a different journal, and so
some of these criticisms may strike the author as familiar.  The
criticisms are no less damaging for having been ignored once.

My first complaint is that @ equivocates over what sort of thing an
"instate" or "credal state" is.  On p. 2 @ is pretty clear that
"'instates' ... mean[s]... a set of charp credence functions", and
later on the same page "credal states are sets of probability
functions".  But later, on p.17, @ says "Credal states keep track only
of the committee's aggregate credal state, whereas doxastic states
keep track of each committee member's individual sharp credences."
And also (p.12) @ talks of "Blake's credence in H_iv dilates to an
instate of [0,1]", but whether Blake learns "match" or "no match" she
updates to *different* sets of probabilities, so it isn't clear that
relfection has any purchase.  @'s discussion of this issue doesn't
seem to have taken on board the discussion of the cited Bradley and
Steele paper, nor of Topey's paper: Topey, Brett. "Coin flips,
credences and the Reflection Principle." Analysis(2012).

(Here I borrow from my earlier report, to outline some problems that
remain problems in this newer version).

The second problem is that the precise ("Laplacean") alternative to
which the Boolean positions are ultimately compared is unclear. It
seems to be an objectivist/entropy-maximising type view of subjective
(precise) credence. Is this objectivity part of its appeal as an
alternative to Bool-B? That is, could a hardcore de Finetti-style
subjectivist not provide a precise alternative that plays the same
role as a precise alternative to Bool-B?

The third problem (and this is related to the second) is that @ makes
use of a distinction between credal state and doxastic state that is
never made clear, and seems very important. It seems to be a complex
thing that involves the agent's evidence... What is a precise
probabilist's doxastic state? And how does this differ from an
imprecise doxastic state? Or are they the same, and the question is
whether imprecise or precise credal states are the better companion to
the complex doxastic state?

Fourth, it's just not clear to me that AC1 and AC2 are desiderata for
a formal model of rational belief. And if they aren't, then they
aren't what's at stake in the debate between Booleans and Laplaceans.

Here are some minor comments

p.2 C_X is defined as a set of probability functions on algebra X, but
this formalism is rarely used again.  Later C_1 and C_2 are apparently
representing two sets of probabilities on the same algebra, sometimes
the subscript is dropped, in short, the formalism in the paper is a
mess.

"[Booleans] may require [the credal set] to be a Borel set on the
associated vector space if Omega is finite."  This is only ever a
technical convenience, not a requirement of rationality, and it's one
that @ never refers to again.  Why bother making such a recondite
technical comment in an otherwise non-technical paper?

p.3 @'s characterisation of "INTERN" is clearly mistaken.  Even
Booleans think that one can learn about the bias of a coin from
observing the outcome of tosses (OBTUSE worries aside for now).  But
if Booleans stuck to the idea that only possible chance hypotheses
were in the instate, then they could not learn by conditioning since
the tosses are independent!  This is why it's important that the CGT
is in terms of covering the spread of the chances, not in only
containing the chances.

p.5--6 the couple of pages on imprecise information theory seem
needlessly detailed.  What point is being made here?  It is unclear.
(@ may feel frustrated with me here, given that I was the one who
suggested @ mention the extant work on generalised information theory
at this juncture in my last review, but the point is not that I don't
think it's worth mentioning, but rather that I think it needs to be
fit into the narrative of the paper, rather than just dumped at the
end of a section.)  The dialectic in this section is just really
unclear.  Klir's best measure doesn't satisfy the constraints Joyce
suggests, but it satisfies some other set of desiderata.  Mork's
measure might not satisfy one of Klir's desiderata (although this is
open as far as we know), but it *does* satisfy Joyce's constraints?
Doesn't it?  This is something @ is disingenuously silent on.  So
what's the upshot?  Work is ongoing and it's open whether we can find
a perfect information measure for sets of probabilities.

p.6 Lewis didn't claim his "summation" formula was original to him,
and it's silly to attribute it to him.  Averaging over a parameter
value is a pretty common practice in statistics.

p.7 John Norton is another name that deserves mention in the providing
arguments against precise probabilities.  He doesn't think imprecise
credences can do the trick either, but others disagree.

Example 3.  This seems like a good example of a case where we have
good information about the chance process and we should all have sharp
credences.  It would be unwise for @ to build @'s case around such a
tendentious example.  It's totally unclear why a Boolean would not be
entitled to reason in the way the precise probabilist can in this
example.

p.8 I'm not sure I agree with @'s analysis of the Hajek and Smithson
example.  H&S are not saying that the agent has full belief in the
chance hypothesis ch = 0.5381.  The point is, wouldn't it be weird to
have such precise attitudes with respect to various bets on whether
you'll get cancer given the imprecise nature of the information the
doctor gave you.  It's not about full beliefs in chances: it's about
the weirdly specific nature of the behaviour sanctioned by imprecise
evidence on the precise view.

p.10--11 The description of dilation is an utter mess.  The definition
of the "c" function is a little vague.  We then see something of the
form "c(X|Y)" which would only be defined if "X|Y" were a proposition,
which it isn't (in the standard theory).  Though in fact, @ refers to
"the proposition H_v|H_iv = H_v" at the top of page 11.  Knowing the
argument, as I do, I can see what @ is trying to say in this passage.
But the passage is a disaster.  Roger White nicely spells out the
premises of the argument.  See also Topey, the SEP article on
imprecise probabilities...

p.11--12 REPETITION First, given that we start with the assumption
that Blake has good reason to think coin iv fair and yet dilation
still occurs, how would further evidence of the same thing convince
Blake of anything?  Also, it's kind of unclear what information Blake
is getting.  If Blake is learning both whether the coins match, and
also whether coin_iv lands heads or tails on each toss, then Blake can
inductively learn about coin_v.  So what is Blake actually learning?

p.12--13 The description of the OBTUSE problem is insufficient.  @
should at least refer to Rinard's paper on the topic, or the SEP
section on "belief inertia".

p.13 I expect Walley at least discussed (if not endorsed) versions of
both of "Augustin's" concessions.  I really encourage @ to read
Walley. At least chapters 1, parts of 2 and 5.

p.14 @'s comment on Example 8 is misguided.  Note that C'' is also
constrained by c(Z) > 1/2.  So Joyce is right that C' and C'' deliver
the same sets of values.

p.17 @'s comments that precise probabilities cooperate better with
information theory seems at odds with the in depth discussion of
generalised information theory earlier in the paper.

I think the final part of the paper, on the broadly epistemicist view
of credal states is an interesting one, and deserves further
elaboration.  (This is, to me, the most interesting part of the
paper).  One thing I'd encourage @ to engage with in this context is
the idea that, just like supervaluationism seems like the right logic
for what an epistemicist could know, imprecise credences seems like
the right representation for a credal epistemicist's access to her
belief states.



Reviewer #3: see attached file



There is additional documentation related to this decision letter. To access the file(s), please click the link below. You may also login to the system and click the 'View Attachments' link in the Action column. 

http://phil.edmgr.com/l.asp?i=69482&l=FQG83UOS

