From lmhuisman35@gmail.com Wed Dec  3 20:32:39 2014
Date: Wed, 3 Dec 2014 15:32:38 -0500
Subject: Re: Judy Benjamin
From: Leendert Huisman <lmhuisman35@gmail.com>
To: Stefan Lukits <sediomyle@gmail.com>
MIME-Version: 1.0
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 8bit
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=utf-8
Status: RO

Hi Stefan,

I am still reading your draft, but I can already give some feedback.

You argue that indeterminate credences are implausible because
Booleans, as you call them, have to concede two points, J1 and J2, in
order to overcome objections by Laplacians, but, once they do that,
they have no real arguments left to defend indeterminacy from a
semantic viewpoint. I haven't finished reading the second half of your
paper, so I don't know whether I will agree that, once J1 and J2 have
been conceded, there is little left with which to defend
indeterminacy. I am not sure, however, that I will have to make that
decision because I do not agree that Booleans need to concede J1.

First, about J2; abandoning CGT. You write that Joyce conceded the
necessity of abandoning J2, but I don't see that. I don't get the
impression that he ever tried to defend CGT, nor do I see that it
matters. Indeterminacy is coherent wherever the credences come from;
at least, you do not make the case that they are not. CGT, as Joyce
write, is "merely the most extreme of a range of possibilities". Of
course, epistemologically CGT is important, but, as far as credences
are concerned, nothing important seems to depend on it.

Now about J1. You write "Joyce does an admirable job showing both that
(J1) and (J2) address White's dilation problem and that they are
necessary in order to avoid White's counter-intuitive results". You
add a reference, but with a strange page number (13f ?), so I could
not verify this statement. What does Joyce actually say and how does
he show the sufficiency and necessity of accepting (J1) and (J2) ? You
use Joyce's Three-sided Die example and conclude that "C and C*
generate the same instates", but that seems to be wrong. Instates, if
I understand you correctly, are sets of credence functions, and, since
C* is a proper subset of C, they do differ. Joyce, in fact, uses that
difference to argue that the full sets of credence functions are
required and not some derived measure such as upper and lower bounds,
or actual ranges. As an aside, I understand Joyce's point but I do not
agree that this example shows the need for full sets of credence
functions. If c(Z) >= 0.5 then c(X) + c(Y) < 0.5 for all c in both C
and C*. Furthermore, however, if c(X) = c(Y) then c(X) < 0.25 in C*
but not in C, so even bounds would already show the difference between
C and C*.

Unless I am missing something in Joyce's paper, I don't see him
admitting that sets of credence functions do not adequately represent
evidence in the sense that different evidence streams that should lead
to different credences lead instead to identical indeterminate
credence sets. The only place where he seems to argue for such a
result is when he addresses the Black/Grey coin example and considers
when the coin is flipped some number of times with both grey and black
showing up. He essentially claims that, regardless of how often black
and grey appear, nothing gets learned because the indeterminate
credence state do not change, but he gives some reasons for why that
is not unreasonable. I have a separate problem with that example,
because it don't think it is obvious that the indeterminate credence
states do not change. Of course, each posterior credence state is a
subset of the (what you call) absolute prior one, but I don't have a
proof that the reverse is true as well. How does he know that every
prior c(.) can be obtained as the posterior of some other prior c*(.)
? Is there a proof of that statement ? Maybe that proof is embedded in
a result by Diaconis and Zabell.

Sorry for being so negative. I am very interested in the problem of
the justification of indeterminacy, and only by trying to disprove it
can we become sure that it is coherent and justifiable. I hope you can
find some good arguments to overcome my objections.

Leendert
