                      Semantics of Not Knowing

                                      Stefan Lukits


1 Synopsis

Traditional Bayesian epistemology used to include the requirement for a
rational agent to hold a sharp credence function. It has recently become
popular to drop this requirement. There are now Bayesian theories which
permit a rational agent to hold indeterminate credal states (from now on
instates) based on incomplete or ambiguous evidence. Iwill refer to Bayesians
who continue to adhere to the classical theory of sharp credences for rational
agents as 'Laplaceans' (e.g. Adam Elga and Roger White). I will refer to
Bayesians who do not believe in the requirement for a rational agent to
hold sharp credences as 'Booleans' (e.g. Peter Walley and James Joyce; see
Boole, 1854, chapters 16--21, for alternative methods to the ones suggested
by Laplace which result in imprecise epistemic probabilities).
After describing the appeal of indeterminacy and showing how contemporary
Laplacean objections fail, Iwill point to more serious failings of indeterminacy
in semantic terms and show how a proper semantics of not knowing, which
we could also call a semantics of partial belief, solves the problems for sharp
credences that Booleans address by introducing instates. There is a sense
in which, by linking knowledge of chances to its reflection in credences,
Booleans seek to reconcile traditional knowledge epistemology concerned
with full belief and formal epistemology concerned with partial belief. There
are other more recent reconciliation projects (see Spohn, 2012; and Moss,
2013), but if my paper is correct then the Boolean approach will not contribute
to this reconciliation because it mixes full belief and partial belief metaphors
in ways that are semantically problematic.
A sharp credence, as much as the term suggests precision and a measure of
certainty, is a representation of an epistemic state chracterized by uncertainty
and lack of information. Importantly, it does not represent the evidence
which informs the epistemic state, and it makes no claim of such a representation.

                                              1


instates are often lauded as doing much better representing uncertainty
together with the evidence that constrains it, but they can no more give
an adequate representation of evidence than sharp credences. This paper is
concerned with the semantic legitimacy of having a 0.5 sharp credence in
heads for a coin of whose bias we are completely ignorant; for a coin whose
fairness is supported by a lot of evidence; and even for a coin about whose
bias we know to be either 1/3 or 2/3 for heads.
One potential Boolean claim is that agents who use instates do better than
Laplaceans when they bet on the truth of events for which they have varying
degrees of evidence. Peter Walley gives an example where a Laplacean does
much worse at predicting soccer games than Boolean peers. I show that
the result is due to an unreasonable restriction on the betting behaviour of
the Laplacean. Once this restriction is lifted, Laplaceans do just as well as
Booleans, except that they are not tangled in the semantic problem of the
double task, where instates are supposed to reflect both the uncertainty of
an agent and other properties of her evidence.
I will present several examples where this double task stretches instates to
the limits of plausibility, for example when they need to aggregate expert
opinion or account for dilation. Joyce's idea that credences can represent
balance, weight, and specificity of the evidence is inconsistent with the use
of indeterminacy (and Joyce himself, in response to the dilation problem,
gives the argument why this is the case). The implicit Boolean claim that
certain properties of the evidence (its ambiguity, its completeness, conflicts
within it) can be recovered from instates is inconsistent with an effective
Boolean answer to the dilation problem.

The Laplacean approach of assigning subjective probabilities to partitions
of the event space (e.g. objective chances) and then aggregating them by
David Lewis's summation formula into a single precise credence function is
semantically tidy and shares many of the formal virtues of Boolean theories.
If the bad taste about numerical precision in our fuzzy, nebulous world
lingers, I can point to philosophical projects in other domains where the
concepts we use are sharply bounded, even though our ability to conceive
of those sharp boundaries or know them is limited, for example Timothy
Williamson's work on vagueness and knowledge as a mental state.




                                           2


2 Motivation for Instates

Booleans claim that it is rational for an agent to hold instates (indeterminate
credal states) in addition to sharp credences, representing uncertainty. Booleans
defend Bayesian epistemology in all other respects, proposing that it is better
off without the requirement for sharp credences. Laplaceans, by contrast,
require sharp credences for rational agents. I want to motivate indeterminacy
as forcefully as possible so that the reader will see (a) the appeal of the
Boolean approach, (b) the insufficiency of the critical response, and (c) the
need for careful articulation of the Laplacean approach that can address the
concerns which motivate some to resort to indeterminacy. Finally, (d) the
undesirable semantics of the Boolean approach, documented both conceptually
and by example, will lead to the conclusion that a Laplacean approach is
the more promising alternative.
The two most compelling reasons for the Boolean approach are (A) that
instates sometimes represent evidence better than sharp credences, to the
point where sharp credences misrepresent the evidence; and (B) that the
preference structure of a rational agent may be incomplete so that representation
theorems do not yield sharp credences to represent such incomplete structures.
There are (C) more technical and paper-specific reasons, such as Thomas
Augustin's attempt to mediate between the minimax pessimism of objectivists
and the Bayesian optimism of subjectivists using interval probability (see
Augustin, 2003, 35f); Alan H[U+00B4]ajek and Michael Smithson's belief that there
may be objectively indeterminate chances in the physical world (see H[U+00B4]ajek
and Smithson, 2012, 33); and Jake Chandler's claim that "the sharp model is
at odds with a trio of plausible propositions regarding agnosticism" (Chandler,
2014, 4). This paper addresses (A) and (B), while leaving (C) to more specific
responses to the issues presented in the cited articles. For the remainder of
this section I am adding a reason (D) that is poorly documented in the
literature, which the paper addresses in the last section.
(D) The Boolean rational agent may do better accepting advantageous
bets than the agent who on principle rejects instates. Walley conducted
an experiment in which Boolean participants did significantly better than
Laplacean participants, betting on soccer games played in the Soccer World
Cup 1982 in Spain (see Walley, 1991, Appendix F). Ireplicated the experiment
using two computer players with rudimentary artificial intelligence and made
them specify betting parameters (previsions) for games played in the Soccer
World Cup 2014 in Brazil. I used the Poisson distribution (which is an

                                             3


excellent predictor for the outcome of soccer matches) and the FIFA ranking
to simulate millions of counterfactual World Cup results and their associated
bets, using Walley's evaluation method. The Boolean player had a slight but
systematic advantage. In section 5, I will provide an explanation and show
how it undermines any support the experiment might give to the Boolean
position.

3 Dilation

Roger White introduces a problem for instates claiming that they lead to
unacceptable doxastic scenarios involving dilation. In dilation, there is a
widening of the instate upon updating instead of a narrowing. Sometimes
this widening is extreme, from a maximally precise credal state to a vacuous
instate, based on little information (see White, 2010 for examples). White's
objection, even though Ithink it fails as it stands, triggers semantic concessions
on the part of Booleans defending their position which will be important to
my semantic criticism of indeterminacy.
In Joyce's response to White, two semantic concessions to White show why
the dilated instates give us the right result. I agree with Joyce: dilation
is what you would expect (1) if credences do not adequately represent
evidence (the same instate can reflect different evidential situations); and
(2) if instates do not reflect knowledge claims about objective chances (Joyce
rejects White's Chance Grounding Thesis CGT, see Joyce, 2010, 289). Dilation
from a sharp 0.5 to an indeterminate [0.01,0.99] or {0.01,0.99} (depending
on whether convexity is required) is unproblematic in the following example,
although the example already prefigures that there is something odd about
the Boolean semantic approach. The example licences a 99:1 bet for one
of the colours, but this is a problem that arises out of Boolean semantics
without dilation, which we will address again in example 4.

       Example 1: Dilating Urns. You draw from an urn with 200 balls (100
       red, 100 black) and receive the information that the urn actually had two
       chambers, one with 99 red balls and 1 black ball, the other with 1 red ball
       and 99 black balls.

If one were to be committed to the principle of regularity, that all states
of the world considered possible have positive probability (for a defence see
Savage et al., 1963); and to the solution of Henry Kyburg's lottery paradox,
                                                4


that what is rationally accepted should have probability 1 (for a defence of
this principle see Douven and Williamson, 2006); and the CGT, that one's
spread of credence should cover the range of possible chance hypotheses
left open by evidence (implied by much of Boolean literature); then one's
instate is always vacuous. Booleans must deny at least one of the premises to
avoid the conclusion. Joyce denies the CGT, but then he continues to make
implicit use of it when he repeatedly complains that sharp credences "ignore
a vast number of possibilities that are consistent with [the] evidence" (for
example in (Joyce, 2005, 170)).
When updating dilates the credal state, it appears that the prior credal
state was in some sense incorrect and did not properly reflect the state of the
world, even though it properly reflected the epistemic state of the agent. Such
a divergence between the proper reflections of epistemic state and state of the
world undermines the subjective interpretation of probabilities at the heart
of Bayesian epistemology. An instate semantically blurs the line between
traditional full belief epistemology and formal partial belief epistemology
(for semantically more intelligible attempts at reconciliation between the
two see Moss, 2013, although Moss is committed to the Boolean approach,
which may weaken her case; and Spohn, 2012, especially chapter 10). White's
objection fails, however, because dilation for indeterminate credences is in
principle not any more surprising than a piece of information that increases
the Shannon entropy of a sharp credence. It is true for both sharp and
indeterminate credences that information can make us less certain about
things.

4 Semantics of Partial Belief

Central to my project is the proper semantic distinction between evidence,
information, and partial belief. Both sharp credences and instates, within
a Bayesian framework, try to represent the uncertainty of an agent with
respect to the truth of a proposition. Instates have a greater ambition
and therefore a double task: they also claim to represent properties of
the evidence, such as its weight, conflict between its constituents, or its
ambiguity.
The Laplacean approach uses partial beliefs about how a parameter is distributed
and then applies Lewis' summation formula (see Lewis, 1981, 266f) to integrate
over them and condense them to a sharp credence. Walley comments on this


                                             5


"reduction" in his section on Bayesian second order probabilities (see Walley,
1991, 258f), but he mistakenly represents the Laplacean approach as a second
order approach, as if the probability distributions that are summarized
by Lewis' formula are of the same kind as the resulting credences. They
are not. They are objective chances or other partitions of the event space
and the subjective probabilities that are associated with them. It is the
Boolean approach which has elements of a second order approach and thus
makes itself vulnerable to regress problems by adding another dimension of
uncertainty to a parameter (the credence) which already represents uncertainty.
One of Joyce's complaints is that a sharp credence of 0.5 for a coin contains
too much information if there is little or no evidence that the coin is fair. This
complaint, of course, is only effective if we make a credence say something
about the evidence. Joyce himself, however, admits that instates cannot
adequately represent the evidence without violating the reflection principle
due to White's dilation problem. He is quite clear that the same instate can
represent different evidential scenarios (see, for example, Joyce, 2010, 302).
Sharp credences have one task: to represent epistemic uncertainty and serve
as a tool for updating, inference, and decision-making. They cannot fulfill
this task without continued reference to the evidence which operates in the
background. To use an analogy, credences are not sufficient statistics with
respect to updating, inference, and decision-making. What is remarkable
about Joyce's response to White's dilation problem is that Joyce recognizes
that instates are not sufficient statistics either. But this means that they fail
at the double task which has been imposed on them. In the following, I will
provide a few examples illustrating this failure.

      Example 2: Aggregating Expert Opinion. You have no information
      whether it will rain tomorrow (R) or not except the predictions of two
      weather forecasters. One of them forecasts 0.3 on channel GPY, the other
      0.6 on channel QCT. You consider the QCT forecaster to be significantly
      more reliable, based on past experience.

An instate corresponding to this situation may be [0.3,0.6] (see Walley,
1991, 214), but it will have a difficult time representing the difference in
reliability of the experts. A sharp credence of P(R) = 0.55, for example, does
the right thing. Beliefs about objective chances make little sense in many
situations where we have credences, since it is doubtful even in the case of
rain tomorrow that there is an urn of nature from which balls are drawn (see

                                                6


White, 2010, 171). What is really at play is a complex interaction between
epistemic states (for example, experts evaluating meteorological data) and
the evidence which influences them.

       Example 3: Precise Credences. Your sharp credence for rain tomorrow,
       based on the expert opinion of channel GPY and channel QCT (you have no
       other information) is 0.55. Is it reasonable, considering how little evidence
       you have, to reject the belief that the chance of rain tomorrow is 0.54 or
       0.56; or to prefer a 54.9 cent bet on rain to a 45.1 cent bet on no rain?

The first question is confused in instructive ways. A sharp credence rejects
no hypothesis about objective chances (unlike an instate). It often has a
subjective probability distribution operating in the background, over which
it integrates to yield the sharp credence. The subjective probability distribution
is condensed by Lewis' summation formula to a sharp credence, without
being reduced to it. Lewis' 1981 paper "A Subjectivist's Guide to Objective
Chance" addresses the question of the relationship between credence, subjective
probability, and objective chance. The Laplacean properly separates the
semantic dimensions, without using second-order probabilities. Formal partial
belief epistemology deals with sharp credences and how they represent uncertainty
and serve as a tool in inference, updating, and decision making; Bayesian
epistemology provides the interpretation of probabilities; and Lewis' Humean
speculations and his interpretation of the principal principle cover the relationship
between subjective probabilities and objective chance.
The second question is also instructive: why would we prefer a 54.9 cent
bet on rain to a 45.1 cent bet on no rain, given that we do not possess the
power of descrimination between these two bets? The answer to this question
ties in with the issue of incomplete preference structure referenced above as
motiviation (B) for instates. Via representation theorems, preferences may
conceptually precede an agent's probability and utility functions, but that
does not mean that we cannot inform the axioms we use for a rational agent's
preferences by undesirable consequences downstream. Completeness may
sound like an unreasonable imposition at the outset, but if incompleteness
has unwelcome semantic consequences for credences, it is not illegitimate
to revisit the issue. Timothy Williamson goes through this exercise with
vague concepts, showing that all upstream logical solutions to the problem
fail and that it has to be solved downstream with an epistemic solution (see
Williamson, 1996).

                                                7


Vague concepts, like sharp credences, are sharply bounded, but not in a
way that is luminous to the agent (for anti-luminosity see chapter 4 in
Williamson, 2000). Anti-luminosity answers the original question: the rational
agent prefers the 54.9 cent bet on rain to a 45.1 cent bet on no rain based
on her sharp credence without being in a position to have this preference
necessarily or have it based on physical or psychological ability (for the
analogous claim about knowledge see Williamson, 2000, 95).
In a way, advocates of indeterminacy have solved this problem for us. There
is strong agreement among most of them that the issue of indeterminacy
for credences is not an issue of elicitation. The appeal of preferences is that
we can elicit them more easily than assessments of probability and utility
functions. The indeterminacy issue has been raised to the probability level
(or moved downstream) by indeterminacy advocates themselves who feel
justifiably uncomfortable with an interpretation of their theory in behaviourist
terms. So it shall be solved there, and this paper makes an appeal to reject
indeterminacy on this level. Isaac Levi seems to agree with me on this point:
when he talks about indeterminacy, it proceeds from the level of probability
judgment to preferences, not the other way around (see Levi, 1981, 533).

      Example 4: Jaynes' Monkeys. Let urn A contain 4 balls, two red and
      two black. A monkey randomly fills urn B from urn A with two balls. We
      draw from urn B. (See Jaynes and Bretthorst, 2003, 160.)

The sharp credence of drawing a red ball is 0.5, following Lewis' summation
formula for the different combinations of balls in urn B. This solution is
more intuitive in terms of further inference, decision making, and betting
behaviour than an instate of {0,1/2,1} or [0,1] (depending on the convexity
requirement), since the instate would licence an exorbitant bet in favour of
one colour.

      Example 5: Three Prisoners. The Three Prisoners problem is well-
      documented (see Mosteller, 1987, 28). Let the three prisoners be X ,X ,X
                                                                               1 2 3
      and the warden tell X that X will be executed.
                               1 3

Peter Walley maintains that for the Monty Hall problem and the Three
Prisoners problem, the probabilities of a rational agent should dilate rather
than settle on the commonly accepted solutions. For the Three Prisoners
problem, there is a compelling case for standard conditioning and the result

                                               8


that the chances of pardon for prisoner X are unchanged after the update
                                                    1
(see Lukits, 2014, 1421f). Walley's dilated solution would give prisoner X
                                                                                            1
hope on the doubtful possibility (and unfounded assumption) that the warden
might prefer to provide X 's name in case prisoner X was pardoned.
                                3 1
Booleans charge that sharp credences often reflect independence of variables
where such independence is unwarranted. Booleans prefer to dilate over the
possible dependence relationships (independence included). White's dilation
problem is an instance of this. The fallacy in the argument for instates,
illustrated by the Three Prisoners problem, is that the probabilistic independence
of sharp credences does not imply independence of variables (the converse
is correct), but only that it is unknown whether there is dependence, and if
yes, whether it is correlation or inverse correlation.

      Example 6: Wagner's Linguist. A linguist hears the utterance of a
      native and concludes that the native cannot be part of certain population
      groups, depending on what the utterance means. The linguist is uncertain
      between some options about the meaning of the utterance. (For full details
      see Wagner, 1992, 252; and Spohn, 2012, 197.)

The mathematician Carl Wagner proposed a natural generalization of Jeffrey
Conditioning for his Linguist example (see Wagner, 1992). Since the principle
of maximum entropy is already a generalization of Jeffrey Conditioning,
the question naturally arises whether the two generalizations agree. Wagner
makes the case that they do not agree and deduces that the principle of
maximum entropy is sometimes an inappropriate updating mechanism, in
line with many earlier criticisms of the principle of maximum entropy (see
van Fraassen, 1981; Shimony, 1985; Skyrms, 1987; and, later on, Grove and
Halpern, 1997).
What is interesting about this case is that Wagner uses instates for his
deduction, so that even if you agree with his natural generalization of Jeffrey
Conditioning (which I find plausible), the inconsistency with the principle of
maximum entropy can only be inferred assuming instates. On the assumption
of sharp credences Wagner's generalization of Jeffrey conditioning perfectly
accords with the principle of maximum entropy. Wagner's argument, instead
of undermining the principle of maximum entropy, just shows that instates
are as wedded to rejecting the claims of the principle of maximum entropy
as the principle of maximum entropy is wedded to sharp credences.


                                              9


5 Evidence Differentials and Cushioning Credences

After I found out that agents with instates do better betting on soccer games
(see section 2), I let player X (who uses sharp credences) and player Y (who
uses instates) play a more basic betting game and used Walley's pay off
scheme (see Walley, 1991, 632) to settle the bets. The simulation results
show that player Y does better for n > 2 while player X does better for
n = 2. A defence of sharp credences for rational agents needs to have an
explanation why, for n > 2, player Y does better. We will call it partial belief
cushioning, which is based on an evidence differential between the bettors.
Compulsory betting is a problem for instates, as Booleans have to find a way
to decide without receiving instructions from the credal state. Booleans have
addressed this point extensively (see for example Joyce, 2010, 311ff; for an
opponent's view of this see Elga, 2010, 6ff). The problem for sharp credences
arises when bets are noncompulsory, for then the data above suggests that
agents holding instates sometimes do better. Bets are sometimes offered by
better informed or potentially better informed bookies. In this case, even
an agent with sharp credences must cushion her credences and is better
off by rejecting bets that look attractive in terms of her partial beliefs. If
an agent does not cushion her partial beliefs (whether they are sharp or
indeterminate), she will incur a loss in the long run. Since cushioning is
permitted in Walley's experimental setup (the bets are noncompulsory),
Laplacean agents should also have access to it and then no longer do worse
than Boolean agents.
The rational agent with a sharp credence has resources at her disposal to
use just as much differentiation with respect to accepting and rejecting bets
as the agent with instates. Often (if she is able to and especially if the
bets are offered to her by a better-informed agent), she will reject both
of two complementary bets, even when they are fair. In 2013, the U.S.
Commodity Futures Trading Commission shut down the online prediction
market Intrade, even though it was offering fair bets, because of expert
arbitrageurs.
Any advantage that the agent with an instate has can be counteracted based
on distribution over partial beliefs with respect to all possibilities. The agent
with instates suffers from a semantic mixing of metaphors between evidential
and epistemic dimensions that puts her at a real disadvantage in terms
of understanding the sources and consequences of her knowledge and her
uncertainties.

                                           10


6 References

References

Augustin, Thomas. "On the Suboptimality of the Generalized Bayes Rule
  and Robust Bayesian Procedures from the Decision Theoretic Point of
  View---a Cautionary Note on Updating Imprecise Priors." In ISIPTA:
  Proceedings of the 3rd International Symposium on Imprecise Probabilities
  and Their Applications. Carleton Scientific, 2003, 31--45.
Boole, George. An Investigation of the Laws of Thought: On Which Are
  Founded the Mathematical Theories of Logic and Probabilities. Walton
  and Maberly, 1854.
Chandler, Jake. "Subjective Probabilities Need Not Be Sharp." Erkenntnis
  79, 5: (2014) 1--14.
Douven, Igor, and Timothy Williamson. "Generalizing the Lottery
  Paradox." British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 57, 4: (2006)
  755--779.

Elga, Adam. "Subjective Probabilities Should Be Sharp." Philosophers'
  Imprints 10, 5: (2010) 1--11.
Grove, A., and J.Y. Halpern. "Probability Update: Conditioning Vs. Cross-
  Entropy." In Proceedings of the Thirteenth Conference on Uncertainty in
  Artificial Intelligence. Providence, Rhode Island: Citeseer, 1997.
H[U+00B4]ajek, Alan, and Michael Smithson. "Rationality and Indeterminate
  Probabilities." Synthese 187, 1: (2012) 33--48.
Jaynes, E.T., and G.L. Bretthorst. Probability Theory: the Logic of Science.
  Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University, 2003.

Joyce, James. "How Probabilities Reflect Evidence." Philosophical
  Perspectives 19, 1: (2005) 153--178.
       . "A Defense of Imprecise Credences in Inference and Decision
  Making." Philosophical Perspectives 24, 1: (2010) 281--323.
Levi, Isaac. "Direct Inference and Confirmational Conditionalization."
  Philosophy of Science 48, 4: (1981) 532--552.

                                        11


Lewis, David. "A Subjectivist's Guide to Objective Chance." In Ifs:
  Conditionals, Belief, Decision, Chance and Time, edited by William
  Harper, Robert Stalnaker, and G.A. Pearce, Springer, 1981, 267--297.
Lukits, Stefan. "The Principle of Maximum Entropy and a Problem in
  Probability Kinematics." Synthese 191, 7: (2014) 1409--1431.
Moss, Sarah. "Epistemology Formalized." Philosophical Review 122, 1:
  (2013) 1--43.

Mosteller, Frederick. Fifty Challenging Problems in Probability with
  Solutions. New York, NY: Dover, 1987.
Savage, Leonard J., Harold Lindman, and Ward Edwards. "Bayesian
  Statistical Inference for Psychological Research." Psychological Review
  70, 3: (1963) 193.
Shimony, Abner. "The Status of the Principle of Maximum Entropy."
  Synthese 63, 1: (1985) 35--53.

Skyrms, Brian. "Updating, Supposing, and Maxent." Theory and Decision
  22, 3: (1987) 225--246.
Spohn, Wolfgang. The Laws of Belief: Ranking Theory and Its Philosophical
  Applications. Oxford, 2012.
Van Fraassen, Bas. "A Problem for Relative Information Minimizers in
  Probability Kinematics." The British Journal for the Philosophy of
  Science 32, 4: (1981) 375--379.
Wagner, Carl. "Generalized Probability Kinematics." Erkenntnis 36, 2:
  (1992) 245--257.

Walley, Peter. Statistical Reasoning with Imprecise Probabilities. London,
  UK: Chapman and Hall, 1991.
White, Roger. "Evidential Symmetry and Mushy Credence." In Oxford
  Studies in Epistemology, edited by Tamar Gendler, and John Hawthorne,
  New York, NY: Oxford University, 2010, 161--186.
Williamson, Timothy. Vagueness. New York, NY: Routledge, 1996.
       . Knowledge and Its Limits. Oxford, UK: Oxford University, 2000.


                                        12


