I have read the aforementioned manuscript with interest. I have to
admit in full honesty that this type of "philosophical" papers is hard
to be reviewed, since the recommendation is unavoidably influenced by
personal taste and "scientific beliefs", although the latter is a
contradiction in terms. These papers, according to my opinion, can
only be recommended for publication as is or to be rejected, since
there is no major research component that would justify a
recommendation in between.

Having said all that, I am a strong believer of not allowing
personal beliefs interfeer with science, and for this reason I
will recommend the paper to be accepted in its present form and
leave the editor make the final decision. I would however like to
provide an alternative point of view to the author, for his future
works.

In the paragraph in-between lines 116-123 the author emphatically
dismisses Wagner's conclusion that the PME is not a reliable
principle as incorrect. He relegates the support information for
his claim in another paper that he will write in the future, and I
don't doubt that.

There is, however, a different point of view, that says that
Wagner is correct. We have encountered several times problems
where PME is insuffient to describe and some communities know that
PME is nothing more than a postulate, a limiting case of the
energy and entropy production conservation laws. The most famous
community is the chemical engineering, where Prigogine proved that
higher-information systems tend to favor the minimum entropy
production as the principle that describes their response. A nice
and short review just got published in that community, that
summarizes these concepts. Although not entirely written in
philosophical-mathematical jargon, I would recommend the author to
read it for his future works:

E. Veveakis, K Regenauer-Lieb, Review of extremum postulates, Current
Opinion in Chemical Engineering, Volume 7, February 2015, Pages 40-46,
ISSN 2211-3398, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.coche.2014.10.006.

I wouldn't want to enter in a philosophical and endless debate on
which principle describes best what; I just wanted to emphasize
that the manuscript is written in a somehow imperative language,
which I consider not appropriate for a scientific topic that
torments the community for quite a few years. Therefore, maybe the
author wants to relax the strong conclusions and allow some
flexibility in his discussion. That aside, I wish the best to the
author for his future research.
